Copy edit of 2020 CSS chapter (#1846)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2020/css.md

For certain metrics, looking at the CSS AST was not enough. We wanted to look at [SCSS](https://sass-lang.com/) wherever it was provided via sourcemaps as it shows us what developers need from CSS that is not yet possible, whereas studying CSS shows us what developers currently use that is. For that, we had to use a *custom metric*—JavaScript code that runs in the crawler when it visits a given page. We could not use a proper SCSS parser as that could slow down the crawl too much, so we had to resort to [regular expressions](https://github.com/LeaVerou/css-almanac/blob/master/runtime/sass.js) (*oh, the horror!*). Despite the crude approach, we got [a plethora of insights](#sass)!

> {# TODO (Authors): it may be obvious to most people who use it (I don't) but is it worth commenting on difference between SCSS and Sass? They are used interchangeably in some places but differentiated in others, so think worth covering here. #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer: This is now inaccurate, since we didn't use custom metrics only for SCSS but also for custom properties. The reference to that custom metric appears to now be removed?

Author: Ignore the bit in red. GitHub struggles to show the actual changes when there are large edits like there are here. so concentrate on the bit in green. The custom metrics and custom properties bit is still in there (but in a different place) so fi you want to suggest a change to that then click on the Files tab, find it and click on the line to suggest a change.

In meantime can you comment on the lines in green?

Author: Thanks. I added this, but actually done in the Sass section rather than here.

## Selectors and the cascade

> {# TODO (Authors) We try to avoid empty headrs. Could we have a short intro sentence or two here? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could one of you add an intro to this section here?

Author: A went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> CSS offers a number of ways of apply styles to page, from classes, ids and using the all-important cascade to avoid duplicating styles. So how are developers applying their styling to their pages?

Only a few of the top classes were presentational, with most of those being either alignment related (`pull-right` and `pull-left` from older [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/), `alignright`, `alignleft` etc.) or `clearfix`—which still occurs in 22% of websites, despite floats being superseded as a layout method by the more modern Grid and Flexbox modules.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="popular-class-names.png",
  caption="The most popular class names by the percent of pages.",
  description="Bar chart showing the top 14 most popular class names for desktop and mobile pages. The active class is found on 40% of pages. The rest of the classes are found on 20-30% of pages and are, in decreasing order: `fa`, `fa-*`, `pull-right`, `pull-left`, `selected`, `disabled`, `clearfix`, `button`, `title`, `wp-*`, `btn`, `container`, and `sr-only`.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRpe_HsNGpekn6YZV9k6QGmcZPxalqnDrL7DrDY-7X65RZEf_-aGfWuEvhk-yWV83ctIceE1bppCLpj/pubchart?oid=1187401149&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="863628849",
  sql_file="top_selector_classes_wp_fa_prefixes.sql"
) }}

### IDs

> Despite IDs being discouraged these days in some circles due to their much higher specificity, most websites still use them, albeit sparingly. Fewer than half of pages used more than one ID in any of their selectors (had a max specificity of (1,x,y) or less) and nearly all had a median specificity that did not include IDs (0,x,y). See the [selector's specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors/#specificity-rules) for more details calculating specificity and this (a,b,c) notation.

Author: Fixed!

Despite IDs being discouraged these days in some circles due to their much higher specificity, most websites still use them, albeit sparingly. Fewer than half of pages used more than one ID in any of their selectors (had a max specificity of (1,x,y) or less) and nearly all had a median specificity that did not include IDs (0,x,y).

{# TODO Authors—Can you explain this (1,x,y)/(0,x,y) syntax more? #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: MDN explains specificity in terms of "hundreds, tens and ones" so if x was 3 and y was 4 in that example then (1,x,y) would be 1 hundreds, 3 tens, 4 ones - the number 134. But this leads authors to think that, for example, 12 class selectors (x=12) is more specific than one ID selector - 12 *10 = 120 > 100. So CSS experts tend to write the specificity with the number of ID, class, and element/pseudo-element selectors as a list: (ID, class, element).

Author: Is there somewhere we can link to this for other readers who are similarly confused? Don't see any mention of this notation in https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity

Reviewer: The spec? :) https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors/#specificity-rules

Author: Like it. Added a sentence to this in https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1846/commits/d83e68afcf451c0735bddf8b527fb0b578be9435. Marking as resolved but feel free to reopen this and suggest alternative language.

But what are these IDs used for? It turns out that the most popular IDs are structural: `#content`, `#footer`, `#header`, `#main`, despite [corresponding HTML elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Document_and_website_structure#HTML_layout_elements_in_more_detail).

{# TODO Authors—This sentence just ends. Do you mean "despite corresponding HTML elements existing that could be used as selectors while also improving the semnatic markup"? #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: Yes, that is a better way to phrase it.

Author: ```suggestion
But what are these IDs used for? It turns out that the most popular IDs are structural: `#content`, `#footer`, `#header`, `#main`, despite [corresponding HTML elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Document_and_website_structure#HTML_layout_elements_in_more_detail) existing that could be used as selectors while also improving the semantic markup.

```

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRpe_HsNGpekn6YZV9k6QGmcZPxalqnDrL7DrDY-7X65RZEf_-aGfWuEvhk-yWV83ctIceE1bppCLpj/pubchart?oid=141873739&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="734822190",
  sql_file="top_selector_ids.sql"
) }}

IDs can also be used to intentionally reduce or increase specificity. The specificity hack of writing an ID selector as an attribute selector (`[id="foo"]` instead of `#foo`) was surprisingly rare, with only 0.3% of pages using it at least once. Another ID-related specificity hack, using a negation + descendant selector like `:not(#nonexistent) .foo` instead of `.foo` to increase specificity, was also very rare, appearing in only 0.1% of pages.

{# TODO Authors: Oh clever! I'd never heard of this! Presumably that first one is to reduce specificty? Should we make that clearer? Or link to an article/articles about either or both of these hacks for uninitiated like me? #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: yes - "instead of `#foo`) to reduce specificity was surprisingly rare"

I suggest [specificity hack](https://csswizardry.com/2014/07/hacks-for-dealing-with-specificity/)

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1846/commits/c90c8fd4362f57f70b4e331a83bde12d73e4a209

## Values and units

{# TODO authors—Can we have an intro sentence or two so we don't have an empty heading here? #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> CSS provides a number of ways of specifying values and units, either in set lengths or calculations or based on global keywords.

  sql_file="units_frequency.sql"
) }}

> {# TODO Authors—What do you think about dropping the `<` and `>` signs and code formatting here and using length instead fo `<length>`? I know that's the official syntax of CSS data types (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Types#Syntax), but IMHO rarely used outside of CSS experts and wonder if the average reader would get confused with HTML elements? I know I did until I looked it up. Or would you prefer to keep them in here since they are actually the correct way of specifying this? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: I would be fine with dropping `<>`

Reviewer: I think given that we link to docs, if anyone is confused they can follow the links. I would vote against dropping the brackets but not a strong objection.

Author: I agree if you kept the code formatting it would be confusing. But I'm talking about dropping both the brackets and code formatting and using the word "length" rather than the type "`<length>`" because, as I say, I don't think this is well known outside of the hardcode CSS spec contributors like yourselves, and for the casual reader it's too easily confused with HTML elements. The fact we only use it on this one type and nowhere else in this document kinda proves that point IMHO.

Author: OK let's close this and leave it as is. Don't think it's a biggie and was just a suggestion.

```suggestion
```

{{ figure_markup(
  image="zero-lengths.png",
  caption="Relative popularity of 0 lengths by unit as a percent of occurrences on mobile pages.",
  description="Pie chart showing 0 lengths with no unit (AKA unitless) used 88.7% of the time on mobile pages, the `px` unit at 10.7%, and other units on 0.5% of instances.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRpe_HsNGpekn6YZV9k6QGmcZPxalqnDrL7DrDY-7X65RZEf_-aGfWuEvhk-yWV83ctIceE1bppCLpj/pubchart?oid=1935151776&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="313150061",
  sql_file="units_zero.sql"
) }}

### Calculations

When the [`calc()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/calc()) function was introduced for performing calculations between different units in CSS, it was a revelation. Previously, only preprocessors were able to accommodate such calculations, but the results were limited to static values and unreliable, since they were missing the dynamic context that is often necessary.

> {# TODO (authors)—revolution or revelation. I think revelation (aka "a great success") but not 100% sure (could be "A sudden, vast change in a situation, a discipline, or the way of thinking and behaving."): https://wikidiff.com/revolution/revelation #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: revolution is correct

Reviewer: revolution

Author: OK suggesting reverting and removing TODO:

```suggestion
When the [`calc()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/calc()) function was introduced for performing calculations between different units in CSS, it was a revolution. Previously, only preprocessors were able to accommodate such calculations, but the results were limited to static values and unreliable, since they were missing the dynamic context that is often necessary.
```

Most calculations are very simple, with 99.5% of calculations involving up to 2 different units, 88.5% of calculations involving up to 2 operators and 99.4% of calculations involving one set of parentheses or fewer (3 out of 4 calculations include no parentheses at all).

{# TODO (analysts): Figure out what happened to the 3+ label in this chart. #}

> {# TODO Rick, I couldn't get this to show despite trying a few different things. Should we just remove this cateogry as it's 0 anyway? Might be less confusing. #}

Author: @rviscomi any ideas here?

Author: Finally got this to work with a space between the 3 and the +

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRpe_HsNGpekn6YZV9k6QGmcZPxalqnDrL7DrDY-7X65RZEf_-aGfWuEvhk-yWV83ctIceE1bppCLpj/pubchart?oid=1246886332&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="437371205",
  sql_file="keyword_totals.sql"
) }}

The `all` property was [introduced in 2013](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/WD-css3-cascade-20130103/#all-shorthand) and gained [near-universal support in 2016 (except Edge) and universal support earlier this year](https://caniuse.com/css-all). It is a shorthand of nearly every property in CSS (except custom properties, `direction`, and `unicode-bidi`), and only accepts the four global keywords as values. It was envisioned as a one liner CSS reset, either as `all: unset` or `all: revert`, depending on what kind of reset we wanted. However, adoption is still very low: we only found `all` on 477 pages (0.01% of all pages), and only used with the `revert` keyword.

{# TODO authors—what are the four global keywords and should we link them here? The spec only lists `initial`, `inherit` and `unset` but then you talk about `revert` so is that the missing 4th one? Should we explain this discrepency? #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: The original three are `initial`, `inherit` and `unset` [defined in CSS values](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-values-4/#common-keywords), and now also  `revert` [defined in CSS Cascade](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-cascade-4/#valdef-all-revert)

Author: What about this then:

```suggestion
The `all` property was [introduced in 2013](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/WD-css3-cascade-20130103/#all-shorthand) and gained [near-universal support in 2016 (except Edge) and universal support earlier this year](https://caniuse.com/css-all). It is a shorthand of nearly every property in CSS (except custom properties, `direction`, and `unicode-bidi`), and only accepts the four global keywords (`initial`, `inherit`, `unset`, and `revert`) as values. It was envisioned as a one liner CSS reset, either as `all: unset` or `all: revert`, depending on what kind of reset we wanted. However, adoption is still very low: we only found `all` on 477 pages (0.01% of all pages), and only used with the `revert` keyword.

{# TODO authors—what are the four global keywords and should we link them here? The spec only lists `initial`, `inherit` and `unset` but then you talk about `revert` so is that the missing 4th one? Should we explain this discrepency? #}

```

Author: In case it's not obvious from above with GitHub diff being less than helpful, I just add the bit in parenthesis and removed the TODO - everything else stayed the same:

> ...only accepts the four global keywords (`initial`, `inherit`, `unset`, and `revert`) as values.

Author: Or alternatively just hyperlinking [four global keywords](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-cascade-4/#defaulting-keywords) text with that link?

```suggestion
The `all` property was [introduced in 2013](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/WD-css3-cascade-20130103/#all-shorthand) and gained [near-universal support in 2016 (except Edge) and universal support earlier this year](https://caniuse.com/css-all). It is a shorthand of nearly every property in CSS (except custom properties, `direction`, and `unicode-bidi`), and only accepts the [four global keywords](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-cascade-4/#defaulting-keywords) as values. It was envisioned as a one liner CSS reset, either as `all: unset` or `all: revert`, depending on what kind of reset we wanted. However, adoption is still very low: we only found `all` on 477 pages (0.01% of all pages), and only used with the `revert` keyword.
```

Author: Or why not both!:

```suggestion
The `all` property was [introduced in 2013](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/WD-css3-cascade-20130103/#all-shorthand) and gained [near-universal support in 2016 (except Edge) and universal support earlier this year](https://caniuse.com/css-all). It is a shorthand of nearly every property in CSS (except custom properties, `direction`, and `unicode-bidi`), and only accepts the [four global keywords](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-cascade-4/#defaulting-keywords) (`initial`, `inherit`, `unset`, and `revert`) as values. It was envisioned as a one liner CSS reset, either as `all: unset` or `all: revert`, depending on what kind of reset we wanted. However, adoption is still very low: we only found `all` on 477 pages (0.01% of all pages), and only used with the `revert` keyword.
```

So why do people stray from these tried and true formats? To express alpha transparency. This is clear when you look at `rgba()`, which is used 40 times more than `rgb()` (13.82% vs 0.34% of all colors) and `hsla()`, which is used 30 times more than `hsl()` (0.25% vs 0.01% of all colors).

> HSL is supposed to be [easy to understand and easy to modify](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#the-hsl-notation). But these numbers show that in practice, HSL is used in style sheets far less than RGB, likely because those advantages are [greatly over-stated](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#ex-hsl-sucks).

Author: Yes it may be a little drier I admit, but as per [the discussion above](https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1846#discussion_r549166171) I found the initial text quite difficult to understand:

So it's much-vaulted as easily understood but it's not actually easily understood?

So why do people stray from these tried and true formats? To express alpha transparency. This is clear when you look at `rgba()`, which is used 40 times more than `rgb()` (13.82% vs 0.34% of all colors) and `hsla()`, which is used 30 times more than `hsl()` (0.25% vs 0.01% of all colors).

And yes, these numbers also show that despite the much-vaunted (but [largely incorrect](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#the-hsl-notation)) easily-understood or easily-modified advantages of HSL, in practice it is used far less than RGB.

> {# TODO Authors—finding it quite difficult to understand that sentence. So it's much-vaulted as easily understood but it's not actually easily understood? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: OK here is another run at that.

"HSL is widely supposed to be easy to understand and easy to modify. But these numbers show that in practice, HSL is used in style sheets far less than RGB. Also, those advantages are [greatly over-stated](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#ex-hsl-sucks)"

Author: LGTM to me. You can sue the little document with the +/- symbol to make suggestions which can then be accepted here (including removing the TODO):

```suggestion
HSL is widely supposed to be easy to understand and easy to modify. But these numbers show that in practice, HSL is used in style sheets far less than RGB. Also, those advantages are [greatly over-stated](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#ex-hsl-sucks).
```

  </figcaption>
</figure>

And, lastly, the once-deprecated—now partially un-deprecated—system colors like `Canvas` and `ThreeDDarkShadow`: these were a terrible idea, introduced to emulate the typical user interface of things like Java or Windows 95, and already unable to keep up with Windows 98, they soon fell by the wayside. Some sites use these system colors to try and fingerprint you, a loophole that [we are trying to close as we speak](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5710). There are few good reasons to use them, and most websites (99.99%) don't, so we are all good.

The [rather useful value `currentColor`](https://css-tricks.com/currentcolor/), surprisingly, trailed at 0.14% of all sRGB colors (1.62% of all named colors).

> {# TODO authors—Is it worth explaining why it's useful or is that obvious? #}

Author: Yeah that link was added after discussion above, but forgot to remove the TODO. Have removed the TODO now.

  </figcaption>
</figure>

And, lastly, the once-deprecated—now partially un-deprecated—system colors like `Canvas` and `ThreeDDarkShadow`: these were a terrible idea, introduced to emulate the typical user interface of things like Java or Windows 95, and already unable to keep up with Windows 98, they soon fell by the wayside. Some sites use these system colors to try and fingerprint you, a loophole that [we are trying to close as we speak](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5710). There are few good reasons to use them, and most websites (99.99%) don't, so we are all good.

The rather useful value `currentColor`, surprisingly, trailed at 0.14% of all sRGB colors (1.62% of all named colors).

> {# TODO authors—Is it worth explaining why it's useful or is that obvious? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: I honestly thought it was obvious (but I have the curse of knowledge here). There are lots of colors that we can see, but you can't use them in web pages. Obviously we want to, especially since native apps can use them.

Author: I think this is another case where GitHub trying it's best to show the replacement text in red is causing more confusion than help! Ignore the bit in red - I'm asking why `currentColor` is useful and whether that should be explained? If it's the current color why do you need this? Maybe a link to this https://css-tricks.com/currentcolor/ would cover it?

Reviewer 2: Aha! Yes, that link is a good description of why it s useful, compared to just duplicating a color in multiple places.

Author: Added that link in https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1846/commits/57d05764a596373118a1e666231f9c1e0b0bfca8

And we are still missing out. Despite being [implemented in Safari in 2016](https://webkit.org/blog/6682/improving-color-on-the-web/), the use of display-p3 color in web pages is vanishingly small. Our crawl of the web found only 29 mobile and 36 desktop pages using it! (And more than half of those were syntax errors, mistakes, or attempts to use the never-implemented `color-mod()` function). We were curious why.

Compatibility, right? You don't want things to break? No. In the style sheets we examined, we found solid use of fallback: with document order, the cascade, `@supports`, the `color-gamut` media query, all that good stuff. So in a style sheet we would see the color the designer wanted, expressed in display-p3, and also a fallback sRGB color. We computed the visible difference (a calculation called [ΔE2000](https://zschuessler.github.io/DeltaE/learn/)) between the desired and fallback color and this was typically quite modest. A small tweak. A careful exploration. In fact, 37.6% of the time, the color specified in display-p3 actually fell inside the range of colors (the gamut) that sRGB can manage.

> {# TODO Authors—you're completely losing me with this :-) Not sure if there's a way to simplify it more or if this is just the nature of this topic and it's just more advanced, which is fine — the rest of the chapter so far is is more than readable for those less-advance amongst us! But still not sure what your point is here? They shouldn't have used display-p3 because sRGB was good enough? Or is it more than people are just cautiously experimenting at the moment so no real gains yet, but more to come (as covered by your next bit of writing after this table? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is a bit dense, but unpacking it more and giving more tutorial material would make it much longer.

> Or is it more than people are just cautiously experimenting at the moment so no real gains yet, but more to come

Yes, that is it.

I am actually considering making a whole blog post about just this one point. But that will take me some time.

Author: What do you think about adding that sentence to the end then?

```suggestion
Compatibility, right? You don't want things to break? No. In the style sheets we examined, we found solid use of fallback: with document order, the cascade, `@supports`, the `color-gamut` media query, all that good stuff. So in a style sheet we would see the color the designer wanted, expressed in display-p3, and also a fallback sRGB color. We computed the visible difference (a calculation called [ΔE2000](https://zschuessler.github.io/DeltaE/learn/)) between the desired and fallback color and this was typically quite modest. A small tweak. A careful exploration. In fact, 37.6% of the time, the color specified in display-p3 actually fell inside the range of colors (the gamut) that sRGB can manage. It seems people are just cautiously experimenting with thus at the moment rather than to get real gains, but more is surely to come so one to watch.
```

Most gradient usage is rather simple, with over 75% of gradients found across the entire dataset only using 2 color stops. In fact, fewer than half of pages contain even a single gradient with more than 3 color stops!

The gradient with the most color stops is [this one](https://dabblet.com/gist/4d1637d78c71ef2d8d37952fc6e90ff5) with 646 stops! So pretty! This is almost certainly generated, and the resulting CSS code is 8KB, so a 1px tall PNG would likely have done the job as well, with a smaller footprint (our image below is 1.3 KB).

{{ figure_markup(
  image="gradient-most-stops.png",
  classes="height-16vw-122px",
  caption="The gradient with the most color stops, 646.",
  description="A screenshot of the gradient with the most color stops, which is a series of intricate multicolor stripes of varying hues.",
  alt="A screenshot of the gradient with the most color stops, which is a series of intricate multicolor stripes of varying hues.",
  width=600,
  height=122
) }}

## Layout

{# TODO Authors:again can we get an intro sentence or two? #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> CSS now has a number of layout options—a far cry from the tables when tables had to be used for layouts. Flexbox, Grid and Multiple-column layouts are now well supported in most browsers so let's look at how these are being used.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="transition-animation-names.png",
  caption="Relative popularity of the categories of animation names used as a percent of occurrences.",
  description="Bar chart showing the relative popularity of animation name categories as a percent of occurrences. The most popular category is `rotate`, which makes up 21% of occurrences on mobile pages, followed by unknown/other at 13%, `fade` at 9%, `bounce` at 7%, `scale` at 6%, `wobble` and `slide` at 5%, `pulse` at 2%, and the rest at 1%: `visibility`, `flip`, and `move`.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRpe_HsNGpekn6YZV9k6QGmcZPxalqnDrL7DrDY-7X65RZEf_-aGfWuEvhk-yWV83ctIceE1bppCLpj/pubchart?oid=709747830&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1998209374",
  sql_file="transition_animation_names.sql"
) }}

## Visual effects

{# TODO authors — intro sentence #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - Could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> CSS also offers a huge variety of visual effects giving designers access to advanced design techniques built into browsers that can be accessed with small amounts of code.

  sql_file="custom_property_names.sql"
) }}

> Out of the 1,000 top property names, fewer than 13 are 'custom', as in made up by individual web developers. The vast majority are associated with popular software, such as WordPress, Elementor, and Avada. To determine this, we took into account not only which custom properties appear in what software (by searching on GitHub), but also which properties appear in groups with similar frequencies. This does not necessarily mean that the main way a custom property ends up on a website is through usage of that software (people do still copy and paste!), but it does indicate there aren't many organic commonalities between the custom properties that developers define. The only custom property names that seem to have organically made the list of top 1000 are `--height`, `--primary-color`, and `--caption-color`.

Author: This was a result of converting the smart quotes as discussed in #1485. They were single quotes before my edit but typographical single quotes. what do you suggest here - double quotes?

> Out of the 1,000 top property names, fewer than 13 are 'custom', as in made up by individual web developers. The vast majority are associated with popular software, such as WordPress, Elementor, and Avada. To determine this, we took into account not only which custom properties appear in what software (by searching on GitHub), but also which properties appear in groups with similar frequencies. This does not necessarily mean that the main way a custom property ends up on a website is through usage of that software (people do still copy and paste!), but it does indicate there aren't many organic commonalities between the custom properties that developers define. The only custom property names that seem to have organically made the list of top 1000 are `--height`, `--primary-color`, and `--caption-color`.

Reviewer: I know, but I don't see a reason they should be single quotes. Do you?

> Out of the 1,000 top property names, fewer than 13 are 'custom', as in made up by individual web developers. The vast majority are associated with popular software, such as WordPress, Elementor, and Avada. To determine this, we took into account not only which custom properties appear in what software (by searching on GitHub), but also which properties appear in groups with similar frequencies. This does not necessarily mean that the main way a custom property ends up on a website is through usage of that software (people do still copy and paste!), but it does indicate there aren't many organic commonalities between the custom properties that developers define. The only custom property names that seem to have organically made the list of top 1000 are `--height`, `--primary-color`, and `--caption-color`.

Author: Sorry I'm a bit confused what you are asking. I didn't write them as single quotes so presume you did? All I did was convert them from single typographical quotes to single straight quotes.

So are you suggesting we remove the quotes altogether? Or change them to double quotes? Either works for me.

> Out of the 1,000 top property names, fewer than 13 are 'custom', as in made up by individual web developers. The vast majority are associated with popular software, such as WordPress, Elementor, and Avada. To determine this, we took into account not only which custom properties appear in what software (by searching on GitHub), but also which properties appear in groups with similar frequencies. This does not necessarily mean that the main way a custom property ends up on a website is through usage of that software (people do still copy and paste!), but it does indicate there aren't many organic commonalities between the custom properties that developers define. The only custom property names that seem to have organically made the list of top 1000 are `--height`, `--primary-color`, and `--caption-color`.

Author: Changed it to double quotes as see this as an air quotes thing.

## CSS and JS

{# TODO Authors:intro sentence #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> The last few years has seen a greater interaction between CSS and JavaScript, beyond the simple setting of CSS classes and styles or off. So how much are we using technologies like Houdini and techniques like CSS-in-JS?

### Houdini

You have likely heard of Houdini by now. Since [several Houdini specs have shipped in browsers](https://ishoudinireadyyet.com/), we figured it is time to see if they are actually used in the wild yet. Short answer: no. And now for the longer answer…

> {# TODO Authors: for those that haven't heard of it should we give a brief intro? Maybe in above empty header? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Author: Thanks, added.

## Internationalization

{# TODO Authors: Intro sentence #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Reviewer 2: Hmm. OK here is an intro sentence.

"English, like many languages, is written in horizontal lines and the characters are laid out from left to right. But some languages (such as Arabic and Hebrew) are mostly written right to left. And then there are languages which may be written in vertical lines, from top to bottom. Not to mention quotations from other languages. So things can get quite complicated. Both HTML and CSS have ways to handle this."

Author: Added that in https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/pull/1846/commits/d83e68afcf451c0735bddf8b527fb0b578be9435. Marking as resolved.

To support bidirectionality, explicit support for indicating direction is available in both HTML via ([the `dir` attribute](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#the-dir-attribute) and the [`<bdo>` element](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/text-level-semantics.html#the-bdo-element)), and CSS (the [direction](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-writing-modes-3/#direction) and [`unicode-bidi`](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-writing-modes-3/#unicode-bidi) properties. We looked at usage of both HTML and CSS methods.

Only 12.14% of pages on mobile (and a similar 10.76% on desktop) set the `dir` attribute on the `<html>` element. Which is fine: most writing systems in the world are `ltr`, and the default `dir` value is `ltr`. Of the pages which did set `dir` on `<html>`, 91% set it to `ltr` while 8.5% set it to `rtl` and 0.32% to `auto` (the explicit direction is unknown value, mainly useful for templates which will be filled with unknown content). An even smaller number, 2.63%, set `dir` on `<body>`. Which is good, because setting it on `<html>` also covers you for content in the `<head>`, like `<title>`.

> {# TODO Authors: I can't find this 2.63% number in the data (https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1sMWXWjMujqfAREYxNbG_t1fOJKYCA6ASLwtz4pBQVTw/edit#gid=368716708) and it's not smaller than 0.32% so bit confused??? #}

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: Um, I don't immediately find it either. Will check more when I have time, I need to start packing for  travel soon, sorry!

Author: @svgeesus did you get a chance to look at this?

Author: I found it @svgeesus . Had to pivot the table to add up all the values and then devide by the total number of pages crawled. Add the table [in the sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1sMWXWjMujqfAREYxNbG_t1fOJKYCA6ASLwtz4pBQVTw/edit#gid=368716708) in case anyone else goes looking at changed:

> An even smaller number, 2.63%, set `dir` on `<body>`

to:

> An even smaller number, 2.63%, set `dir` on `<body>` than on `<html>`

to make it more obvious were talking about the whole HTML numbers and not just the 0.32 that use auto.

Resolving.

While these properties are fairly [well supported](https://caniuse.com/css-logical-props) (with some exceptions), they are not used very much outside of user agent style sheets. None of the logical properties were used on more than 0.6% of pages. Most usage was to specify margins and paddings. Logical keywords for `text-align` were used on 2.25% of pages, but apart from that, none of the other keywords were even encountered at all. This is by large driven by browser support: `text-align: start` and `end` have [fairly good browser support](https://caniuse.com/mdn-css_properties_text-align_flow_relative_values_start_and_end) whereas logical keywords for `clear` and `float` are only supported in Firefox.

## Browser support

{# TODO Authors: another empty heading #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> A perennial problem with the web platform is how to introduce new features and extend the platform. CSS has seen us moving from vendor prefixes to feature queries as a better way of introducing change so we wanted to look at how those two techniques were being used.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="supports-criteria.png",
  alt="Relative popularity of @supports features queried as a percent of occurrences.",
  caption="Relative popularity of `@supports` features queried as a percent of occurrences.",
  description="Bar chart of the relative popularity of @supports features queried as a percent of occurrences. The most popular feature queried is `sticky` at 49% of occurrences on mobile pages, followed by `ime-align` at 24%, `mask-image` at 12%, `overflow-scrolling` at 5%, `grid` at 2%, custom properties, `transform-style`, `max()`, and `object-fit `all at 1%, and `appearance` at approximately 0%.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRpe_HsNGpekn6YZV9k6QGmcZPxalqnDrL7DrDY-7X65RZEf_-aGfWuEvhk-yWV83ctIceE1bppCLpj/pubchart?oid=1901533222&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1155233487",
  sql_file="supports_criteria.sql"
) }}

## Meta

{# TODO Authors: intro paragraph please #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> Up until now we've looked at what CSS developers have used, but in this section we want to look more about _how_ they are using it.

### CSS mistakes

{# TODO Authors: Intro sentence or two #}

> 

Author: @LeaVerou, @svgeesus, @rachelandrew - could you add something here?

Author: I went with this. Feel free to shout if you disagree:

> As with any complex, evolving platform not everything is done correctly. So let's look at some of the mistakes developers are making out there.
